DOCS-578 Add light up bot tutorial (#892)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/light-up.md

---
title: "Use Object Detection to Turn Your Lights On"
linkTitle: "Turn on Lights with Object Detection"
weight: 49
type: "docs"
tags: ["camera", "vision", "detector", "python"]
description: "How to turn a light on when your webcam sees a person."
# Author: Hazal Mestci
---

> This tutorial uses the Viam [Vision Service](/services/vision/) with your computer's built-in webcam to detect the presence of a person and turn a lamp on when you sit down at your desk.

Reviewer: I think it still makes sense to add here that they are using a smart Kasa plug because it gets introduced later on abruptly. ("This project is a great place to start if you are new to building robots, and have a smart plug laying around.")

Author: Ah good point

## Hardware requirements

You need the following hardware for this tutorial:

- Computer with a webcam
  - This tutorial uses a MacBook Pro but any computer running macOS or 64-bit Linux will work
- Mobile phone (to download the Kasa Smart app)
- [Kasa Smart Wi-Fi Plug Mini](https://www.kasasmart.com/us/products/smart-plugs/kasa-smart-wifi-plug-mini)
- [Kasa Smart Light Bulb](https://www.kasasmart.com/us/products/smart-lighting/kasa-smart-light-bulb-multicolor-kl125)
- [Table Lamp Base](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B08KZNZVY7/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o02_s00?) or similar

## Software requirements

The following software is used in this tutorial:

- [Python 3.8 or newer](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
- [`viam-server`](/installation/install/)
- [Viam Python SDK](https://python.viam.dev/)
  - The Viam Python SDK (software development kit) lets you control your Viam-powered robot by writing custom scripts in the Python programming language.
  Install the Viam Python SDK by following [these instructions](https://python.viam.dev/).
- [Project repo on GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/devrel-demos/tree/main/Light%20up%20bot)

> ## Install `viam-server` and connect to your robot

Reviewer: if we are leaving all other python instructions out, why are we keeping the viam-server one? because now it looks like software requirements are prerequisites, and viam-server step is there too

Author: I see your point, and this is a good question across all the tutorials. I feel like this is okay here because viam-server is more Viam-specific? And I mostly left it in because the way the setup tab works, viam-server ends up being intimately connected with creating a new robot, which I'm assuming people need to do for each tutorial, whereas maybe they only need to install Python once.

Go to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and create a new robot.

Go to the **SETUP** tab of your new robot's page and follow the steps [to install `viam-server` on your computer](link to install docs).

> ## Configure object detection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure camera component

```

{{< gif webm_src="../img/light-up/light-up.webm" mp4_src="../img/light-up/light-up.mp4" alt= "The project working: a person sitting at a desk with a computer and lightbulb set up in front of her. As she leaves the light turns off, and as she enters the frame, the light turns back on." >}}

## Hardware requirements

The following hardware is used in this tutorial:

- Computer with a webcam
  - This tutorial uses a MacBook Pro but any computer running macOS or 64-bit Linux will work
- Mobile phone (to download the Kasa Smart app)
- [Kasa Smart Wi-Fi Plug Mini](https://www.kasasmart.com/us/products/smart-plugs/kasa-smart-wifi-plug-mini)
- [Kasa Smart Light Bulb](https://www.kasasmart.com/us/products/smart-lighting/kasa-smart-light-bulb-multicolor-kl125)
- [Table Lamp Base](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B08KZNZVY7/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o02_s00?) or similar

## Software requirements

The following software is used in this tutorial:

- [Python3](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
- [`viam-server`](/installation/install/)
- [Viam Python SDK](https://python.viam.dev/)
- [Project repo on GitHub](https://github.com/viam-labs/devrel-demos/tree/main/Light%20up%20bot)

> ## Prerequisites

Author: okay getting rid of this part

Make sure you have a recent version of Python installed on your computer by running

```bash
python --version
```

> If the output is Python 3.9.0 or later, you should be fine for this tutorial.

Reviewer 2: Is this the version this was tested on or do we actually need some functionality that was only added in Python 3.9? I would assume anything 3.0+ is probably fine. 

I think you can remove everything until line 48 and then merge the installation instructions for the SDK with the list above.

If not, [download a newer version here](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

The Viam Python SDK (software development kit) lets you control your robot by writing custom scripts in the Python programming language.
Install the Viam Python SDK by following [these instructions](https://python.viam.dev/).

> Now you are ready to make your robot!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you are ready to create your robot!
```

Author: Okay, eliminating this part anyway

## Install `viam-server` and connect to your robot

> Go to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and make or log in to your account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Go to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and create a new robot.
```

i think the logging in and signing up is clear from context

Reviewer 2: you can also link to the create a robot docs where there is more detail

Create a new robot.

> Go to the **SETUP** tab of your new robot's page.
> Select the correct **Mode** (Linux or Mac) and (if you're on Linux) **Architecture** for your computer.
> Most Linux desktops and laptops use **X86_64** architecture.
> 
> Follow the steps on this tab to install `viam-server` on your computer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Go to the **SETUP** tab of your new robot's page and follow the steps [to install `viam-server` on your computer](link to install docs).
```

## Configure object detection

> On your new robot's page, go to the **CONFIG** tab.
> 
> ![The CONFIG tab in Builder mode on the Viam app.](../img/light-up/config-tab.png)
> 
> On the **CONFIG** tab, create a new component:
> 
> - **Name**: `my-camera`
> - **Type**: `camera`
> - **Model**: `webcam`
> 
> Click **Create Component** to add the camera.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On your new robot's page, go to the **CONFIG** tab and create a new component with:

- **Name**: `my-camera`
- **Type**: `camera`
- **Model**: `webcam`

![The CONFIG tab in Builder mode on the Viam app.](../img/light-up/config-tab.png)
```

Reviewer: also the naming i chose in the tutorial was camera-mac so all the gifs and recordings i sent as well as the final code refer to that

Author: I don't think this makes sense since the screenshot just shows the empty config tab

Reviewer: i think its better if we make it as generic as possible but say "i am using a mac so i named mine camera-mac". its really confusing to have different naming in **Name**: `my-camera`, code, and screenshots/videos

> Click the **Video Path** box to reveal a drop-down populated with camera paths that have been identified on your machine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Click the **Video Path** field to reveal a drop-down populated with camera paths that have been identified on your machine.

```

Navigate to the **CONTROL** tab where you can see your camera working.

{{< gif webm_src="../img/light-up/control-panel.webm" mp4_src="../img/light-up/control-panel.mp4" alt= "Opening the camera panel on the control tab, toggling the video feed on, and watching as a person wearing headphones waves at the camera." >}}

## Set up the Kasa Smart Plug

Plug your smart plug into any power outlet and turn it on by pressing the white button on the smart plug.
To connect the plug to your wifi, download the Kasa Smart app from the [App Store](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/kasa-smart/id1034035493) or [Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tplink.kasa_android&gl=US) to your mobile phone.
When you first open the app, you will be prompted to create an account.
As you do this, you will receive an email with subject line "TP-Link ID: Activation Required" to complete your account registration.

Next, follow the steps in Kasa's [How to set up my TP-Link Smart Plug Switch via Kasa guide](https://www.tp-link.com/us/support/faq/946/) to add your device and connect it to your wifi.
Once it is connected, you will no longer need to use the mobile app.

> Next, open a terminal on your computer and run the following command to download the [smart plug Python API](https://github.com/python-kasa/python-kasa):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, open a terminal on your computer and run the following command to install the [smart plug Python API](https://github.com/python-kasa/python-kasa):

```

```bash
pip3 install python-kasa
```

Next, run the following command to return information about your smart device:

```bash
kasa discover
```

You should see this command output something like this:

![Terminal output with information about the smart plug including the host, device state (on), timestamp, hardware and software versions, MAC address, location (latitude and longitute), whether the LED is currently on, and the timestamp of when it last turned on. There is also a list of modules (schedule, usage, antitheft, time and cloud).](../img/light-up/kasa-discover-output.png)

> Copy the host address (for example, 10.1.11.221).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Copy the host address (for example, `10.1.11.221`). 
```

> You will need to include it in your Python code in a later step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will need to include it in your Python code in the next step.

```

## Write Python code to control your object detection robot

Navigate to the **CODE SAMPLE** tab on the Viam app.
Make sure **Python** is selected in the **Language** selector.

Click the **COPY CODE** button.
Paste the code into a new Python file on your computer.
This code connects your script to your robot.

Now you are ready to write the code to turn your smart plug on and off based on camera readings.
You will use a [TFLite](https://www.tensorflow.org/lite) model to detect specific objects, and a corresponding text that holds class labels for your TFLite model.

> For more information on the Vision Service, check out our [documentation](/services/vision/).

Reviewer 2: I think move this last line to later when you've actually mentioned the vision service. This intro could generally be better

> In your Python code, as you set up the vision service parameters, you will need to change the `model_path` to where your TFLite package lives, and the `label_path` to where your text file lives.

Reviewer 2: we haven't said anything about the vision service at all aside from pointing to docs

Author: Added mention of the vision service to the first sentence of the doc, and will rewrite this bit now

You can download them from [here](https://github.com/viam-labs/devrel-demos/tree/main/Light%20up%20bot).

You will also generate a person detector function within your code, to detect a person and trigger the camera.

{{% alert title="Info" color= "info" %}}

> Technically, you can detect any object that is listed in the <file>labels.txt</file> (such as a dog or a toilet) but for this tutorial, we are detecting a person.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Technically, you can detect any object that is listed in the <file>labels.txt</file> (such as a dog or a person) but for this tutorial, we are detecting a person.
```

Please don't use toilet as the example

To detect something else with the camera, just change the string "person" to a different item in the <file>label.txt</file> file.

```python

>                if d.class_name.lower() == "person":
>                    print("This is a person!")
>                    found = True

Reviewer 2: I assume you wanted this to be on the same level as in the code sample but that doesn't look good. Generally any editor folks use should help with formatting as well
```suggestion
if d.class_name.lower() == "person":
    print("This is a person!")
    found = True

```

```

{{% /alert %}}

The sample code below specifies the file locations of the model and labels, which object you are detecting, and it configures the detector.

```python
    vision = VisionServiceClient.from_robot(robot)
    params = {"model_path": "./effdet0.tflite", "label_path": "./labels.txt", "num_threads": 1}
    personDet = VisModelConfig(name="person_detector", type=VisModelType("tflite_detector"), parameters=params)
    await vision.add_detector(personDet)
    names = await vision.get_detector_names()
    print(names)
```

> Add the host address (for example, 10.1.11.221) of your smart plug that you found in the `kasa discover` step to the code shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the host address (for example, `10.1.11.221`) of your smart plug that you found in the `kasa discover` step to the code shown below.

```

Reviewer 2: and link to the above step

> In this snippet, if the camera detects a person, it will print to the terminal “This is a person!” and turn on the smart plug.

Reviewer 2: You're not actually instructing them to add this code anywhere.

If it does not find a person, it will write “There’s nobody here” and will turn off the plug.

```python
   #example: plug = SmartPlug('10.1.11.221')
   plug = SmartPlug('replace with the host IP of your plug')
   await plug.update()

   await plug.turn_off()
   state = "off"
   for i in range(N):
       image = await camera.get_image()
       detections = await vision.get_detections(image, "person_detector")
       found = False
       for d in detections:
           if d.confidence > 0.8:
               print(d)
               print()
               if d.class_name.lower() == "person":
                   print("This is a person!")
                   found = True
       if found:
           #turn on the smart plug
           await plug.turn_on()
           await plug.update()
           print("turning on")
           state = "on"
       else:
           print("There's nobody here")
           #turn off the smart plug
           await plug.turn_off()
           await plug.update()
           print("turning off")
           state = "off"
```

> Next, save and run your code.

Author: yeah I totally agree

> Next, save and run your code.

Author: Done

You will see your plug turn on and off as you move in the frame of your computer's webcam!

Your terminal should look like this as your project runs:

```bash
This is a person!
turning on
There's nobody here
turning off
```

> The complete code for this project can be found [here](https://github.com/viam-labs/devrel-demos/blob/main/Light%20up%20bot/lightupbot.py).

Reviewer 2: link to this at the beginning of the blog post as well please

Author: It is there in the software section

Author: I will add a thing that says create a file and put this in it, and then just change the connect configuration
